<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I: Palliation of the Gambit</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Palliation of the Gambit</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Much has been written critically about Felix Kennaston since the disappearance of his singular personality from the field of contemporary writers; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Froser’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Biography</i> contains all it is necessary to know as to the facts of Kennaston’s life. Yet most readers of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Biography</i>, I think, must have felt that the great change in Kennaston no long while after he “came to forty year”⁠—this sudden, almost unparalleled, conversion of a talent for tolerable verse into the full-fledged genius of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Men Who Loved Alison</i>⁠—stays, after all, unexplained. …</p>
				<p>Hereinafter you have Kennaston’s own explanation. I do not know but that in hunting down one enigma it raises a bevy; but it, at worst, tells from his standpoint honestly how this change came about.</p>
				<p>You are to remember that the tale is pieced together, in part from social knowledge of the man, and in part from the notes I made as to what Felix Kennaston in person told me, bit by bit, a year or two after events the tale commemorates. I had known the Kennastons for some while, with that continual shallow intimacy into which chance forces most country people with their near neighbors, before Kennaston ever spoke of⁠—as he called the thing⁠—the sigil. And, even then, it was as if with negligence he spoke, telling of what happened⁠—or had appeared to happen⁠—and answering my questions, with simply dumbfounding personal unconcern. It all seemed indescribably indecent: and I marveled no little, I can remember, as I took my notes. …</p>
				<p>Now I can understand it was just that his standard of values was no longer ours nor really human. You see⁠—it hardly matters through how dependable an agency⁠—Kennaston no longer thought of himself as a man of flesh-and-blood moving about a world of his compeers. Or, at least, that especial aspect of his existence was to him no longer a phase of any particular importance.</p>
				<p>But to tell of his thoughts, is to anticipate. Hereinafter you have them full measure and, such as it is, his story. You must permit that I begin it in my own way, with what may to you at first seem dream-stuff. For I commence at Storisende, in the world’s youth, when the fourth Count Emmerick reigned in Poictesme, having not yet blundered into the disfavor of his papal cousin Adrian <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. … With such roundabout gambits alone can some of us approach⁠—as one fancy begets another, if you will⁠—to proud assurance that life is not a blind and aimless business; not all a hopeless waste and confusion; and that we ourselves may (by-and-by) be strong and excellent and wise.</p>
				<p>Such, in any event, is the road that Kennaston took, and such the goal to which he was conducted. So, with that goal in view, I also begin where he began, and follow whither the dream led him. Meanwhile, I can but entreat you to remember it is only by preserving faith in human dreams that we may, after all, perhaps some day make them come true.</p>
				<footer>
					<p class="signature">Richard Fentnor Harrowby.</p>
					<p>Montevideo<br/>
					14 April 1917.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
